# Mini-SOC Build Journal

## Phase 1 - Environment Setup
- Created Azure account and accessed Azure Portal.
- Set up Resource Group: `MiniSOC-RG` in Australia East. The resource group is basically a folder that keeps all cloud related stuff together (Log Analytics Workspace (LAW), Sentinel, VMs, etc)  
- Setup Log Analytics Workspace and added it to the Resource Group, this is a cloud database that will store all the logs
- Connected Microsoft Sentinel to the Mini-SOC LAW. Sentinel will monitor logs and also allow me to write write queries and build dashboards and alerts.

## Phase 2 - Log Ingestion

- Created a new resource (Virtual Machine), wouldn't let me continue unless I changed the free subscription type to "pay as you go"
- To ensure the Mini-SOC lab remains cost-controlled, I configured an Azure budget alert named Mini-SOC1 under my billing account.
Monthly Budget: USD $200
Alert Threshold: 80% (USD $160)
Email Notifications: Enabled
This setup ensures proactive cost monitoring during continuous operation of Azure resources (Log Analytics Workspace, Sentinel, and virtual machines). It also demonstrates financial governance, a critical element of real-world SOC management and cloud security operations.
- After this I successfully deployed the Windows 11 Pro VM (MiniSOC-VM01) in Azure using the standard_B1s instance type -> configured trusted launch, secure boot and vTpm for security with diagnostics and auto shutdown enabled to support log ingestion into Microsoft Sentinel while keeping costs low.
- Installed Sysmon inside the VM to begin collecting detailed Windows telemetry (process creation, network connection, registry changes, file modifications)
- Used SwiftOnSecurity Sysmon config for optimised noise reduced logging, suitable for Sentinel analysis
- Sysmon logs are forwarded to the log analytics workspace, enabling advanced correlation and detection in microsoft sentinel 

## Phase 3 - Data Collection and Agent Integration
- Deployed a Data Collection Rule (MiniSOC-DCR) to connect the Azure Monitor Agent with the MiniSOC virtual machine
- Rule associated with the MiniSOC-LAW Log Analytics Workspace to automatically ingest logs from the Windows 11 Pro VM (MiniSOC-VM01).
- Configured multiple Windows event channels for log forwarding:
  - Microsoft-Windows-Sysmon/Operational – captures detailed process, network, and file-change telemetry generated by Sysmon.
  - System and Application (optional) – for core OS and application event tracking.
 - Successfully verified deployment of the data collection rule, confirming that Azure Monitor Agent is active and ready to forward event data to the workspace.
 - This integration establishes the telemetry pipeline between the VM and Sentinel, allowing advanced threat analytics, correlation, and visualisation across all Mini-SOC resources.

## Phase 4 - Log Validation and Sentinel (Defender XDR) Integration 
- Confirmed end to end telemtry flow from MiniSOC-VM01 through the Azure Monitor Agent (AMA) and Mini-SOC-DCR into the MiniSOC-LAW Log Analytics workspace
- Executed a simple KQL query within Microsoft Sentinel:
` Event
| where Source == "Microsoft-Windows-Sysmon"
| take 10 `
- This query returned the current Sysmon events from the VM such as process creation, network activity and registry operation, confirming that endpoint telemtry is being ingested successfuly
- Sysmon (installed on MiniSOC-VM01) -> Azure Monitor Agent -> Log Analytics Workspace -> Sentinel (Defender XDR)
- This setup enables full stack detection, incident correlation and threat hunting capabilities across the mini soc lab, while remaning aligned with Microsofts transition to unified Defender XDR.







  





